The Lord of the Rings is a trilogy of epic high fantasy adventure films directed by Peter Jackson based on the novel The Lord of the Rings by the English author J. R. R. Tolkien. The films are titled identically to the three volumes of the novel: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001), The Two Towers (2002), and The Return of the King (2003). Produced and distributed by New Line Cinema with the co-production of Jackson's WingNut Films, the films feature an ensemble cast combining established and younger actors.

Set in the fictional world of Middle-earth, the films follow the hobbit Frodo Baggins as he and the Company of the Ring embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring to defeat its maker, the Dark Lord Sauron. The Company eventually splits up and Frodo continues the quest with his loyal companion Sam and, eventually, the treacherous Gollum. Meanwhile, Aragorn, heir in exile to the throne of Gondor, along with the elf Legolas, the dwarf Gimli, Merry, Pippin, Boromir, and the wizard Gandalf, unite to save the Free Peoples of Middle-earth from the forces of Sauron and rally them in the War of the Ring to aid Frodo by distracting Sauron's attention.

The three films were shot simultaneously in Jackson's native New Zealand from 11 October 1999 until 22 December 2000, with pick-up shots from 2001 to 2003. It was one of the biggest and most ambitious film projects ever undertaken, with a budget of $281 million (equivalent to $530 million in 2024). The first film in the series premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 10 December 2001; the second film premiered at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City on 5 December 2002; the third film premiered at the Embassy Theatre in Wellington on 1 December 2003. An extended edition of each film was released on home video a year after its release in cinemas.

The Lord of the Rings is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential film series ever made. It was a major financial success and is among the highest-grossing film series of all time, having grossed over $2.9 billion worldwide. Its faithfulness to the source material was a subject of discussion. The series received numerous accolades, winning 17 Academy Awards out of 30 total nominations, including Best Picture for The Return of the King. In 2021, the Library of Congress selected The Fellowship of the Ring for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[1]

Films
The Fellowship of the Ring
Main article: The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring
In the Second Age, lords of Elves, Dwarves, and Men each receive Rings of Power. Sauron secretly forges the One Ring, giving it power over the other Rings. Men and Elves battle Sauron. Isildur cuts the Ring from Sauron's finger, ending the Second Age. The Ring corrupts Isildur, who is killed by Orcs. The Ring is lost for 2,500 years until Gollum finds it. Centuries later, the Ring is found by the hobbit Bilbo Baggins.

Sixty years later, Bilbo passes on the Ring to Frodo. The Wizard Gandalf discovers it is the One Ring, and warns Frodo to leave. Frodo sets out with Sam, pursued by Sauron's nine Nazgûl servants. They meet Merry and Pippin and evade the Nazgûl, reaching Bree, but Gandalf is not there, captured by the evil Wizard Saruman. A Ranger named Strider guides them to Rivendell, but they are ambushed on Weathertop by the Nazgûl. Their leader stabs Frodo with a Morgul blade. Arwen, Strider's beloved Elf, rescues Frodo. Gandalf escapes from Saruman's tower. Arwen's father Elrond holds a council. It decides the Ring must be destroyed in the fires of Mount Doom. Frodo volunteers to take the Ring, accompanied by eight others. Bilbo gives Frodo his sword Sting, and a mithril mail-shirt.

The company travels through the Mines of Moria. Gollum follows them to reclaim the ring. They are attacked by Orcs and a troll. A Balrog attacks; the others escape as Gandalf confronts the Balrog and is pulled into darkness. The Fellowship reaches Lothlórien, where Galadriel, the Elf-queen, tellsFrodo that he alone can complete the quest. The Fellowship travels downriver. Boromir attempts to take the Ring and is killed by Orcs; Merry and Pippin are captured. Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli head to rescue Merry and Pippin while Frodo and Sam travel towards Mordor.

The Two Towers
Main article: The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
Frodo and Sam get lost in hills near Mordor, tracked by Gollum. Capturing Gollum, Frodo gets him to guide them.

Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli enter the kingdom of Rohan. The Orcs are killed by Éomer's riders of Rohan; Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn Forest. Éomer gives Aragorn horses. In Fangorn, Aragorn's group meets a resurrected Gandalf. Gandalf leads them to Rohan's capital, Edoras; Gandalf frees Théoden from Saruman's control. Théoden travels to Helm's Deep to defend against Saruman's army. In Fangorn, Merry and Pippin meet the Ent Treebeard. He takes them toward Isengard, where they see how Saruman has destroyed the forest. Enraged, the Ents storm Isengard, trapping Saruman in his tower. Aragorn arrives at Helm's Deep. They fight off a night attack; at dawn, the Orc army is destroyed by the trees of Fangorn Forest.

Gollum leads Frodo and Sam to the well-defended Black Gate, and recommends another route. Frodo and Sam are captured by Faramir's Rangers. Frodo helps Faramir catch Gollum. Learning of the One Ring, Faramir takes them to Gondor to bring it to his father, Denethor, but lets them go. Feeling betrayed, Gollum decides he will reclaim the Ring by leading them to the giant spider Shelob.

The Return of the King
Main article: The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King
Gandalf, Théoden and the others go to Isengard, and reunite with Merry and Pippin. Gandalf retrieves Saruman's palantír, and the group returns to Edoras to celebrate their victory at Helm's Deep. Pippin looks into the palantír, seeing Sauron and a burning tree. Gandalf deduces that the enemy plans to attack Gondor; he rides there with Pippin to warn its leader, Denethor. Pippin triggers the lighting of warning beacons to call Rohan for help.